H
H
EALTH
INTS
Texas Cooperative Extension The Texas A&M University System
Editors: Janet M. Pollard, MPH & Carol A. Rice, Ph.D., RN
December 2006 Vol. 10 No. 10
develops only after exposure to a multitude of
Reducing Contagious Illness
germs. Young children in large groups are breed-
in the Child Care Setting ing grounds for the organisms that cause illness.
Little hands rub drippy noses and then transfer
infectious agents to other children or to shared
Taking action for yourself & your kids
toys.”1 Children cough and sneeze, releasing
Young children get sick. It’s that simple. “A infectious agents into the air and onto other
child’s immunity improves with time. children and shared items that may be mouthed
School-age children gradually become less or touched and transferred to the mucous mem-
prone to common illnesses and recover more branes (eyes, nose, mouth, genitals) of another
quickly from the diseases they do catch.”1 “In- child. Not only can these infectious agents spread
fants and young children who spend time in from child to child but from child to provider,
group child care settings generally have a higher among providers, and from provider to child
number of illnesses than children kept at home. (e.g., when changing a diaper of one child and
Frequently, those caring for young children then diapering or wiping the nose of another
experience increased illnesses as well.”2 child without taking appropriate precautions).
Childhood illness may not affect a family until a All child care providers should learn and use
child starts child care or school. After that, it may health precautions to prevent or reduce illness.
seem to the family that the child is sick all the Since some illnesses are contagious even before
time. “This pattern is normal as [the] child builds symptoms appear, care providers need to be
a robust immune system. Resistance to infection aware of how diseases are communicated among
children and between children and providers.
I N S I D E “By always observing caution, providers can do
H E A L T H H I N T S . . . much to prevent the spread of disease.”2
Common types of communicable diseases.....2
This issue of HealthHints will address these health
Modes of transmission........................................3
precautions, giving practical, step-by-step guide-
Handwashing........................................................4
lines for preventing and reducing the spread of
A note about types of soap .................................5
illness in your child care facility.
Cleaning, sanitizing, & disinfecting..................6
Recipes for cleaning & sanitizing ......................7
Best practices for reducing the spread of
infection .................................................................8
Gloving procedure: How & why?.....................10
A note about shoes...............................................13
“Potentially” infectious........................................14
Child care provider..............................................16
Resources...............................................................16
References..............................................................17
1

5 Sore throat – Most sore throats are caused
Common Types of
by viruses, but about 15 percent of
Communicable Diseases children’s sore throats are caused by strepto-
cocci – the bacteria that causes strep throat.
Fevers above 101 degrees F are common in
What to watch for
strep throat, and swallowing can be so
painful that the child may have difficulty
The terms communicable disease and
eating.1
infectious illness are used interchangeably
and sometimes misunderstood. These
Other common illnesses in children are:
terms simply mean that the illness is contagious
• Chicken pox – Itchy, fluid-filled blisters
or “catchable.” “A communicable disease is any
caused by a virus.5
bacterial, viral, or parasitic infection in the body
• Ringworm – Skin infection caused by a
that can be spread from one individual to an-
fungus (not by a worm).6
other.”2 Communicable or infectious diseases can
• Head lice – Tiny insects that infest the hair
vary from the common cold and flu to more
of the scalp and sometimes eyebrows and
uncommon diseases like meningitis and hepati-
eyelashes, resulting in intense itching and
tis.2
sometimes red bumps that become crusty
and ooze.7
Currently, the top five infectious illnesses that
• Impetigo – Skin disorder caused by bacterial
keep children home from child care or school
are: infection and characterized by crusty skin
1 Colds – More than 200 different viruses are lesions. Typically, the infection begins as a
known to cause the symptoms of the com- cluster of tiny blisters, followed by oozing
mon cold. Some seldom produce serious and the formation of a thick, honey or
illnesses. Others produce mild infections in brown-colored crust that is firmly stuck to
adults but can precipitate severe lower the skin.2, 8
respiratory infections in young children.
Children have about 6–10 colds per year, Infectious diseases of a more serious nature may
while adults average about 2–4 colds per include:
year.3 • Meningitis – Viral or bacterial infection that
2 Gastroenteritis – Commonly called “stom- causes inflammation of the membranescov-
ach flu,” though not akin to the flu for ering the brain and spinal cord. Symptoms
which we can be vaccinated, gastroenteritis is may include fever and chills, nausea and
characterized by vomiting and diarrhea, vomiting, stiff neck, sensitivity to light, and
which can lead to dehydration, particularly mental status changes.9
in young children. Gastroenteritis can be • Hepatitis – Inflammation of the liver, which
caused by viral, bacterial, or parasitic infec- can be caused by an infection from parasites,
tions; however, viral gastroenteritis is highly bacteria, or viruses (such as hepatitis A, B, or
contagious and is responsible for the major- C). Symptoms may include dark urine and
ity of outbreaks in developed countries.4 pale or clay-colored stools, loss of appetite,
3 Ear Infection (otitis media) – Respiratory fatigue, abdominal pain or distention, gen-
illnesses, such as colds and allergies, cause eral itching, jaundice, nausea and vomiting,
congestion, which may squeeze shut a child’s low-grade fever, weight loss, and breast
eustachian tube – the tiny drainage pipe for development in males.10
the middle ear. Fluid trapped in the middle • HIV/AIDS – Viral infection caused by
ear can become a breeding ground for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that
viruses or bacteria (i.e., viral or bacterial ear gradually destroys the immune system,re-
infection, respectively).1 sulting in infections that are hard for the
4 Pink eye (conjunctivitis) – Pink eye can be a body to fight. Any symptoms of illness may
viral or bacterial infection that results in occur since infections can occur throughout
inflammation of the clear membrane that the body. Most individuals infected with HIV
covers the white part of the eye and lines the progress to AIDS (acquired immunodefi-
inner surface of the eyelids.1 ciency syndrome – the most serious stage of
HIV disease, which causes severe damage to
2

the immune system) if not treated. People
Modes of Transmission
infected with HIV, however, may have no
symptoms for up to 10 years, but they can
still transmit the infection to others. The
immune system gradually weakens until
How infection spreads
they are diagnosed with AIDS.2, 11, 12
Understanding how germs are
transmitted can help us in identifying
the best ways to prevent or reduce the
spread of illness. There are four primary ways
common illnesses that children acquire are
spread:
Children in group child care are going to
1 airborne/respiratory,
get ill...it’s inevitable ~
2 fecal/oral,
• Young children have a lower resis-
3 blood/body fluids, and
tance to infection and communicable
4 direct contact.13, 14
disease.
• Chances of exposure are increased
Airborne/respiratory
because of the large numbers of indi- Airborne/respiratory transmission of infection
viduals with whom they come into occurs when germs (viruses, bacteria, parasites)
contact. pass from the lungs, throat, or nose of one
• Children in child care settings play person to another person through the air.14
together, sharing toy and joys.13 Respiratory infections, such as colds and flu, are
responsible for most illnesses. Most colds
present with fever, runny nose, coughing, and
sneezing. Illness is spread by coughs or sneezes
into the air or by secretions from the nose or
mouth. Other illnesses that are spread by air-
borne droplets include chicken pox, hand-foot-
mouth disease, measles, mumps, whooping
cough, and rubella.13
Fecal/oral
Fecal/oral transmission occurs when feces or
objects contaminated with feces are touched and
then the mouth is touched.14 These types of
infection are usually intestinal infections that
cause diarrhea. In these cases, viruses, bacteria,
or parasites spread infection from person to
person directly from the bowel movement to the
mouth, usually by way of the hands; by diaper-
ing; or indirectly by food or other objects that
get into the mouth.13 Some examples of illnesses
spread through fecal/oral transmission include
viral enteritis, E coli 0157:H7, Giardia,
Cryptosporidiosis, Shingella, Salmonella, or
Hepatitis A.
3

Blood/body fluids
Handwashing
Blood/body fluid transmission occurs only when
there is direct contact with blood or body fluids
of an infected person and an uninfected person.
HIV, Hepatitis B, and Hepatitis C are some
Number 1 way to prevent the spread of illness
examples of diseases transmitted through direct
contact with the blood/body fluids of an infected “Germs
multiply rapidly in warm, moist
person.13, 14
places. When objects or hands touch
places where there are a lot of germs,
Direct contact
they pick up the germs, which then enter the
Direct contact transmission occurs when an
body through the nose, eyes, mouth, and/or
uninfected person touches the skin or body fluid
broken skin.”2 For this reason, the hands are a
(e.g., nasal secretions, oral secretions) of an
primary avenue for the transport of germs into
infected person or touches a contaminated
the body. In fact, handwashing is the number
surface – in other words, they come into “direct
one way to prevent the spread of communi-
contact” with the virus, bacteria, or parasite.
cable disease. This message cannot be empha-
Skin infections and infestations such as impe-
sized enough to the provider, parent, and child.
tigo, lice, scabies, ringworm, and herpes simplex
Simply running hands under water for a couple
are generally transmitted through direct contact.
of seconds and drying them on a towel, how-
Contact with nasal and oral secretions can
ever, is not enough. Share and emphasize the
spread illnesses such as chicken pox, influenza,
following guidelines for appropriate
measles, meningococcal meningitis, mumps,
handwashing from the National Resource
whooping cough, rubella, and pink eye.13, 14
Center for Health and Safety in Child Care.15
For more information on illnesses and their
When Hands Should Be Washed
modes of transmission, see the chart entitled
Hands should always be washed upon arrival for
“How Some Childhood Infectious Diseases Are
the day or when moving from one child care
Spread” at:
group to another. Also, wash hands at the fol-
http://www.dfps.state.tx.us/handbooks/
lowing times:
ms_homes_standards/apx_v_d.htm,
as well as the descriptions of communicable
Before and after ~
diseases at
• eating, handling food, or feeding a child;
http://www.dfps.state.tx.us/handbooks/
• giving medication; and
ms_homes_standards/apx_v_e.htm).
• playing in water that is used by more than
one person.
Regardless of how disease is transmitted or how
minor or severe the illness, the precautions
After ~
necessary to prevent their spread are the same.2
• diapering;
Let’s take a look at precautionary measures your
• using the toilet or helping a child use the
child care program can take to minimize the
spread of communicable disease and promote a toilet;
healthy environment for the children in your • handling bodily fluid (mucus, blood, vomit),
care. from sneezing, wiping and blowing noses;
from mouths, or from sores;
• handling uncooked food, especially raw
meat and poultry;
• handling pets and other animals;
• playing in sandboxes; and
• cleaning or handling the garbage.15
4

Steps for Handwashing Helping Children with Handwashing
Children and staff members should wash their Caregivers should provide assistance with
hands using the following method: handwashing at a sink for a child who can be
safely cradled in one arm and for children who
1 Check to be sure a clean, disposable paper can stand but not wash their hands indepen-
(or single-use cloth) towel is available. dently. A child who can stand should either use a
child-size sink or stand on a safety step at a
2 Turn on warm water, no less than 60 height at which the child’s hands can hang freely
degrees F and no more than 120 degrees F, to under the running water. After assisting the
a comfortable temperature. child with handwashing, the staff member
should wash his or her own hands.
3 Moisten hands with water, and apply liquid
soap to hands. If a child is unable to stand and is too heavy to
hold safely to wash hands at the sink, caregivers
4 Rub hands together vigorously until a soapy should use the following method:
lather appears, and continue for at least 10- • Wipe the child’s hands with a damp paper
15 seconds. Rub areas between fingers, towel moistened with a drop of liquid soap.
around nailbeds, under fingernails, jewelry, Then discard the towel.
along the back of hands and up wrists.16 For • Wipe the child’s hands with a clean, wet
young children, who cannot understand the paper towel until the hands are free of soap.
amount of time recommended, have them Then discard the towel.
sing the alphabet (abc) song; twinkle, • Dry the child’s hands with a clean paper
twinkle little star; or twice through the
towel.15
happy birthday song.17
A Note about Types of Soap
5 Rinse hands under running water, no less
Hands should be washed with liquid soap and
than 60 degrees F and no more than 120
water when possible, but an alcohol-based
degrees F, until they are free of soap and dirt.
hand sanitizer can be helpful as a supplement
Leave the water running while drying hands.
or substitute when soap and water are not
available. Look for a hand sanitizer with at least
6 Dry hands with a clean, disposable paper or
60 percent alcohol in it.18 Follow the
single-use cloth towel.
manufacturer’s directions. Generally, directions
for hand sanitizers require placing enough hand
7 If taps do not shut off automatically, turn
sanitizer in the palm of your hand to thor-
taps off with a disposable paper or single-use
oughly cover your entire hand and rubbing
cloth towel.
hands together until dry.16
8 Throw the disposable paper towel into a
Provide and encourage the use of alcohol-based
lined trash container; or place single-use
hand sanitizers to wash hands immediately if a
cloth towels in the laundry hamper; or hang
child comes into contact with any body fluid at
individually labeled cloth towels to dry. Use
locations where handwashing facilities may not
hand lotion to prevent chapping of hands, if
be available.16
desired.15
Note: Plain, liquid soap and water are best.
Liquid soap is more sanitary than bar soap
where multiple people will be using the soap.
Antibacterial soaps are NOT needed. Antibac-
terial soaps may contain triclosan, a chemical
that kills both bad and good bacteria. While bad
bacteria can make you sick or cause infection,
good bacteria can help you. The triclosan in
antibacterial soaps may change the balance of
bacteria on your skin and may even make
bacteria harder to kill.17
5

Cleaning, Sanitizing &
Disinfecting
Keeping a healthy environment
In addition to handwashing, cleaning and
sanitizing/disinfecting surfaces that could
pose a risk to children or staff is one of the
most important steps to reducing the spread of
communicable diseases in the child care set-
ting.19 Before we go any further, let’s take a
moment to distinguish the terms cleaning,
sanitizing, and disinfecting.
Clothes rinsed in sanitizing solution – used
Cleaning – Removing dirt and soil with soap
for food-preparation areas, large toys, books, and
and water.
activity centers.
Sanitizing – Removing dirt and soil AND
Dipping the object in a container filled with
certain bacteria so that the number of germs is
sanitizing solution – used for smaller toys.19, 20
reduced to such a level that the spread of disease
is unlikely.
It is important to note that the duration of
contact and concentration of the sanitizing
Disinfecting – Removing dirt and soil AND
solution vary with the type of application. More
bacteria AND virtually all germs.20
chemical is required when a cloth or object is
dipped into sanitizing solution because each
Sanitizing and disinfecting are often used to
time the cloth or object is dipped, some germs
describe the same type of “cleaning” – to remove
are released into the solution, potentially con-
germs to a level that the spread of disease from
taminating the solution if it is not at a high
one person to another is unlikely.20 For this
enough concentration. When applying sanitizing
reason, we will use the word sanitizing through-
solution, always read the label and follow in-
out the remainder of this issue of HealthHints to
structions for dilution and minimum contact
describe such “cleaning.”
time.19
Routine cleaning with detergent and water is the
In general, it is best not to rinse off sanitizer or
most useful method for removing germs from
wipe the object dry right away. A sanitizer must
surfaces in the child-care setting. Some items
be in contact with the germs long enough to kill
and surfaces, however, require the additional
them ~
step of sanitizing after cleaning to reduce the
• for spray bleach solution, usually allow a
number of germs on a surface to a level that is
unlikely to transmit disease.19 Sanitizing applies minimum of 2 minutes to air dry;
to many routine housekeeping procedures • for cleaned and rinsed dishes submerged in a
including bedding, bathrooms, kitchen properly prepared bleach solution, usually
countertops, floors, and walls.20 allow 1 minute of contact time.19 (See more
details in the next section – Recipes for Clean-
Sanitizer solutions can be applied in several ways ing & Sanitizing.)
to surfaces that have been cleaned with deter-
gent and rinsed: Since chlorine evaporates into the air leaving no
residue, surfaces sanitized with bleach may be
Spray bottle – used for diaper-changing sur- left to air dry. Some industrial sanitizers, how-
faces, toilets, potty chairs, door knobs, cabinet ever, require rinsing in fresh water before the
handles, phone receivers, countertops, and object can be used again.19
tables.
6

Recipes for Cleaning & Sanitizing
For regular cleaning, detergent and water is most useful. For sanitizing, household bleach with
water is recommended. It is effective, economical, convenient, easy to mix, non-toxic, safe if
handled properly, and readily available. Be sure to purchase “household” bleach and not bleach
used for industrial application, which can be hazardous. Household bleach comes in two strengths:
5.25% hypochlorite (regular strength) or 6% (ultra strength). (Note: Use bleach with caution on
metal or metallic surfaces. If bleach is found to be corrosive, use a different sanitizer on these
materials.)19
Recipe for spray application on surfaces that have been cleaned and rinsed:
(minimum contact time = 2 minutes)
1/4 cup household bleach + 1 gallon of cool water
or
1 tablespoon household bleach + 1 quart of cool water.
This recipe is appropriate for bathrooms, diapering areas, countertops, tables, toys, door knobs,
cabinet handles, phone receivers, sinks, floors, and surfaces contaminated with body fluid. Note:
Always clean the surface first. If there is a spill, wipe up as much as possible with a paper towel;
then clean and sanitize. Where surfaces contaminated with body fluids are involved, wear gloves
(see Gloving Procedure in this issue of HealthHints).
Recipe for submerging of eating utensils that have been cleaned and rinsed:
(minimum contact time = 1 minute)
1 tablespoon bleach + 1 gallon of cool water.
Important notes about bleach:
• Bleach solution and water loses its strength and is weakened by heat and sunlight. Therefore, it
should be mixed with cool, fresh water every day for maximum effectiveness.
• Any leftover bleach solution should be discarded at the end of the day.
• Spray bottles and containers should be clearly labeled and stored out of reach of children.19
Industrial Products
In addition to bleach-sanitizing solution, industrial products are also available. Choose products
that meet the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) standards for “hospital grade” germicides
(solutions that kill germs). Be cautious of
industrial products labeled as “disinfec-
tants,” having “germicidal action,” or that
simply say “kills germs” – they may not
have the same effectiveness as bleach and
water or EPA-approved hospital grade
germicides. Always read the label for
instructions.19
For a sample cleaning/sanitizing schedule,
see http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/
cleaning_pf.htm.
7

dispensed so the container will not be
Best Practices for Reducing
touched during diaper changing;
the Spread of Infection • a plastic bag for any soiled clothes;
• disposable gloves (put gloves on before
handling soiled clothing or diapers – see
Diapering, food preparations, equipment...
Gloving Procedure in this issue of
Now that we’ve focused on the import- HealthHints); and
ance of handwashing, cleaning, and • a thick application of any diaper cream
sanitizing, let’s look at some significant (when appropriate) removed from the
areas where these and other procedures are container to a piece of disposable material
important and necessary to the health and safety such as facial or toilet tissue.
of the children in our care:
• diapering, Step 2: Carry the child to the changing table,
• handling food, keeping soiled clothing away from you and any
• handling equipment and personal items, and surfaces you cannot easily clean and sanitize
• ventilation and fresh air. after the change.
• Always keep a hand on the child.
Diapering • If the child’s feet cannot be kept out of the
When diapering, it is especially important to diaper or from contact with soiled skin dur-
keep hands and surfaces clean to reduce the risk ing the changing process, remove the child’s
of fecal/oral transmission of germs. The diaper- shoes and socks so the child does not con-
ing surface should be kept clean with the use of taminate these surfaces with stool or urine
a plastic-covered pad. Make sure the pad is free during diaper changing.
of cracks or tears. If the diapering surface cannot • Put soiled clothes in a plastic bag, and se-
be easily cleaned after each use, then use a curely tie the plastic bag to send the soiled
disposable material, such as a paper sheet, shelf clothes home.
paper, or wax paper on the changing table.
Discard the disposable material after each Step 3: Clean the child’s diaper area.
diapering. • Place the child on the diaper-change surface
and unfasten the diaper, but leave the soiled
It is also important to sanitize the diapering diaper under the child.
surface after each use and at the end of each day. • If safety pins are used, close each pin imme-
Be sure to wash hands with soap and warm diately once it is removed, and keep pins out
water immediately after diapering each child. of the child’s reach. Never hold pins in your
Be careful to clean between fingers and under- mouth.
neath jewelry and fingernails.21 Wearing dispos- • Lift the child’s legs as needed to use dispos-
able gloves is also recommended. able wipes to clean the skin on the child’s
genitalia and buttocks. Remove stool and
The following is a detailed guide from the urine from front to back, and use a fresh
National Resource Center for Health and Safety wipe each time. Put the soiled wipes into the
in Child Care to help keep you and the children soiled diaper or directly into a plastic-lined,
in your care safe and healthy when changing hands-free covered can.
diapers:22
Step 4: Remove the soiled diaper without con-
Step 1: Get organized. Before you bring the taminating any surface not already in contact
child to the diaper-changing area, wash your with stool or urine.
hands, and gather and bring what you need to • Fold the soiled surface of the diaper inward.
the diaper-changing table: • Put soiled disposable diapers in a covered,
• non-absorbent paper liner large enough to
plastic-lined, hands-free covered can. If reus-
cover the changing surface from the child’s
able cloth diapers are used, put the soiled
shoulders to beyond the child’s feet;
cloth diaper and its contents (without empty-
• fresh diaper, clean clothes (if you need them); ing or rinsing) in a plastic bag or into a
• wipes for cleaning the child’s genitalia and plastic-lined, hands-free covered can to give
buttocks, removed from the container or to parents or the laundry service.
8

• Remove gloves using the proper technique Step 8: Wash your hands, and record the diaper
(see Gloving Procedure), and put them into a change in the child’s daily log.
plastic-lined, hands-free covered can. • In the daily log, record what was in the
• Use a disposable wipe to clean the surfaces of diaper and any problems (such as a loose
the caregiver’s hands and another to clean stool, an unusual odor, blood in the stool, or
the child’s hands. Put the wipes into the any skin irritation). Report as necessary.22
plastic-lined, hands-free covered can.
• Check for spills under the child. If there are As a reminder, you can post these steps from the
any, use the paper that extends under the “Diapering” poster found at
child’s feet to fold over the disposable paper http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/
so a fresh, unsoiled paper surface is now DiaperingPoster.jpg above your diaper-changing
under the child’s buttocks. area:
Note: Gloves must be worn when blood or 1 Keep supplies ready.
bodily fluids containing blood are present 2 Protect the surface with clean, non-porous
(see Gloving Procedure). disposable paper.
3 Keep one hand on the child at all times.
Step 5: Put on a clean diaper and dress the child. 4 Place the soiled diaper in a container lined
• Slide a fresh diaper under the child. with a plastic bag.
• Use facial or toilet tissue to apply any neces- 5 Wipe front to back. Use each cloth or towel
only once.
sary diaper creams, discarding the tissue in a
6 Diaper and dress the child.
covered, plastic-lined, hands-free covered
7 Wash your hands and the child’s. Assist the
can.
child back to the group.
• Note and plan to report any skin problems
8 Place soiled clothes in a plastic bag.
such as redness, skin cracks, or bleeding.
9 Remove disposable paper. Clean and sanitize.
• Fasten the diaper. If pins are used, place your
10 Wash your hands.
hand between the child and the diaper when
11 Dry hands.
inserting the pin.
12 Dispose of the towel in a container lined with
a plastic bag.23
Step 6: Wash the child’s hands, and return the
child to a supervised area.
• Use soap and water, no less than 60 degrees F
and no more than 120 degrees F, at a sink to
wash the child’s hands.
Step 7: Clean and sanitize the diaper-changing
surface.
• Dispose of the disposable paper liner used on
the diaper-changing surface in a plastic-lined,
hands-free covered can.
• Clean any visible soil from the changing
surface with detergent and water; rinse with
water.
• Wet the entire changing surface with the
sanitizing solution.
• Put away the spray bottle of sanitizer. If the
recommended bleach dilution is sprayed as a
sanitizer on the surface, leave it in contact
with the surface for at least 2 minutes. The
surface can be left to air dry or can be wiped
dry after 2 minutes of contact with the
bleach solution.
9

Gloving Procedure: How & Why?
Why use gloves?
“Gloves provide a protective barrier against germs that cause infections. Use gloves made of dispos-
able latex. If you’re allergic to latex, use vinyl gloves.
• Wearing gloves does not replace the need to wash your hands. Latex and vinyl gloves are a good
barrier, but they may not be completely non-porous.
• Wearing gloves reduces contamination, but does not eliminate it.
• If the gloves become contaminated while you are wearing them, be sure to remove them
before touching clean surfaces.
Disposable gloves should be worn:
• when contact with blood or blood-containing fluids is likely, particularly if the caregiver’s
hands have open cuts or sores – for instance, when providing first aid or changing a diaper with
bloody diarrhea; and
• when cleaning surfaces contaminated with blood or body fluids, such as large amounts of
vomit or feces.
For added protection, wear gloves when changing the diaper of a child with diarrhea or a diagnosed
gastrointestinal disease. Wearing gloves for routine diaper changing is optional.
If your skin does come into contact with blood or other body fluids, immediately and thoroughly
wash the contaminated skin.”24
How to use gloves?
Using the appropriate gloving procedure can keep you and the children you care for safer from
infection. Use the following steps, in order, when using disposable gloves:
• Wash your hands and dry them.
• Put on a clean pair of gloves.
• Provide the appropriate care – disposing of any contaminated materials in a leak-proof, plastic
bag that can be tied or sealed.
• Remove each glove carefully. Grab the first glove at the palm and strip the glove off. Touch dirty
surfaces only to dirty surfaces.
• Ball up the dirty glove in the palm of the other gloved hand.
• With the clean hand, strip the glove off from underneath the wrist, turning the glove inside out.
Touch dirty surfaces only to dirty
surfaces.
• Discard the gloves immediately in a
plastic bag-lined step can.
• Wash your hands.19
For a visual depiction of the gloving
procedure, see http://nrc.uchsc.edu/CFOC/
PDFVersion/Appendix%20D.pdf.
10

Handling Food • Clean kitchenware, countertops, and other
Of particular concern when handling food is things that have come in contact with spoiled
taking precautions against foodborne illness (i.e., food or raw meat, chicken, or eggs. Sanitize
food poisoning) and any other illness that can by spraying them with the household bleach
occur through fecal/oral transmission. E. coli is solution, allowing it to stand for at least 2
one type of bacteria, typically contaminating minutes, and then dry with a paper towel or
ground meat, that can cause severe illness and allow to air dry.27
be particularly threatening to children younger
than 5 years. E. coli can potentially cause kidney • Always wash your hands, utensils,
failure and even death in these children.25 countertops, cutting boards, clothes, towels,
aprons, and sinks in hot soapy water after
Thus, the rule of thumb for food handling to handling raw meat.25
reduce the risk and spread of any communicable
disease is “cool it, clean it, cook it.”25 • Wash high-chair trays, bottles, and nipples in
a dishwasher, if available. If the trays do not
Cool It
fit in the dishwasher, wash with detergent,
Raw meat and poultry (especially ground meats)
rinse, spray with the bleach solution, and air
are more perishable than most foods. Bacteria
dry.27
can multiply in ground meat and poultry in a
temperature range between 39-140 degrees F (4- • All eating and drinking utensils, tableware,
60 degrees C). Keep these products and other
and kitchenware should be cleaned and
products refrigerated. Keep meats on ice if you
sanitized after each use, or disposable items
are more than an hour from the store to the
can be used.28, 29 Be sure to label any drinking
child care facility. Defrost meats by placing them
cups brought in for a child with his/her
in a container that will hold juices and let them
name and keep out of reach of other chil-
thaw in the refrigerator – NEVER at room
dren.
temperature. Cook or freeze meat within 1–2
days.25
The easiest way to clean and sanitize dishes is
to use a dishwasher, which incorporates chemi-
Clean It
cals or heat sanitizing.28
Food-preparation areas should be kept separate
from eating, laundry, toileting, and diapering
If handwashing, you’ll need three different
areas.26 Cleaning of food-preparation areas and
basins (compartments):
utensils requires a bit more diligence in the child
1 one for washing,
care setting than at home. Use the following
2 one for rinsing, and
guidelines outlined by Global Healthy Child
3 one for sanitizing.
Care to help with cleaning food-handled items
(as well as mouthed toys):
Use the following procedure for handwashing
utensils (or toys):
• Don’t use cloths or towels used to wipe
1 Scrape off any leftover food.
countertops or other food-contact surfaces
2 Use the first compartment to wash the
for anything else. These cloths must be
dishes (or toys) thoroughly in hot water
sanitized after they are used.27
containing a detergent solution.
3 Rinse in the second compartment.
• Don’t use a sponge – use a cloth that can be 4 Use the third compartment to sanitize
laundered. The structure of natural and the dishes (or toys) by one of these methods:
artificial sponges provides an environment in – The safest and easiest method is to
which germs thrive.28
immerse the dishes (or toys) for at least
2 minutes in a lukewarm – not less than
• Wash food-contact surfaces with detergent 75 degrees F (24 degrees C) – bleach
and water, rinse, sanitize with bleach solu- solution. Then air dry the sanitized items.
tion, and air dry.27 – Immerse the dishes (and toys) for at least
30 seconds in water heated to 170
degrees F (77 degrees C). The water
11

temperature should be maintained at that Cook It
temperature throughout the sanitizing Be sure to cook foods to appropriate tempera-
process. A hot-water booster is usually tures before serving. High heat kills harmful
required to heat water to a high enough bacteria. When cooking raw ground meat, cook
temperature. To avoid burning the skin until you see no pink in the meat and the coolest
while immersing dishes and utensils in part of the meat reaches 165.2 degrees F (74
this hot-water bath, use special racks degrees C).25 A meat thermometer (available at
designed for this purpose. Then air dry most grocery stores) can be used to test meat’s
the items. Because it requires very hot internal temperature.
water, this method is less safe than the
bleach-sanitizing method.28 Handling Equipment & Personal Items
Toys and equipment should be cleaned and
• Pick up and touch clean spoons, knives, and sanitized frequently, particularly in programs
forks by their handles, not by any part that that care for infants and toddlers, who tend to
will be in contact with food. When children put everything in their mouths.2 You can follow
help set the table, be sure they have washed the schedule set forth in the Sample Cleaning/
their hands thoroughly, and remind them Sanitizing Schedule at http://www.healthykids.us/
not to touch the parts of the tableware that chapters/cleaning_pf.htm.
will have contact with food and go into the
mouth. Handle clean cups, glasses, and Toys
bowls so that fingers and thumbs don’t Toys that cannot be washed and sanitized should
touch the insides or the rims of these items.30 not be used in your program. If a toy is placed in
a child’s mouth or has come into contact with
• Be mindful of good hygiene when around body secretions or excretions, set it aside to be
food: cleaned and sanitized. Make sure you have
– Wear clean clothes, and maintain a high enough toys to replace the contaminated toy
standard of personal cleanliness. with another throughout the day until there is
– Wash your hands using correct hand- time for cleaning/sanitizing. Small toys with
washing procedures before preparing hard surfaces can be put in a dishpan labeled
and serving food and as necessary to “soiled toys” until cleaning can occur. Machine-
keep your hands free of dirt, germs, and washable cloth toys should be for use by one
body fluids. child only until these toys can be laundered.
– Also keep your hands clean while han- You will need to monitor children closely to
dling food-contact surfaces, dishes, and prevent shared mouthing of toys.19
utensils.
– Do not prepare or serve food while ill Bedding
with a communicable disease or with Cribs and crib mattresses as well as any resting/
uncovered hands or skin lesions. If you napping mats should have non-porous, easy-to-
have skin lesions on your hands, you wipe surfaces that are used only by one child
should wear gloves while involved with and/or cleaned and sanitized between each
food. child’s use. Bedding (sheets, pillows, blankets,
– Keep your hair covered with a hairnet or and sleeping bags) should be washable, and each
cap while preparing food.31 child’s bedding should be kept separate from
– Be sure children always wash their hands others. Lice infestations, scabies, ringworm, and
before and after eating. other diseases can spread in bedding material
that various children use. Providing bedding for
For a sample food each child and storing each set in individually
service cleaning labeled bins, cubbies, or bags in a manner that
schedule, see separates the personal articles of one individual
http:// from those of another will prevent the spread of
nrc.uchsc.edu/ disease.19 Space children 24 or more inches apart
CFOC/ during nap or rest time, and alternate them head
PDFVersion/ to foot to prevent any spread of illness.13
Appendix%20S.pdf.
12

Personal Items Warm Weather
Personal items, such as hats, coats, combs, Germs multiply rapidly in warm, moist places.2
brushes, toothbrushes, pacifiers, and clothes Humidity increases in warm weather and can
should never be shared. Hats, combs, and also lead to the growth of mold and dust mites
brushes are of particular concern because if in fabrics, which in turn can cause allergies to
there is a lice infestation, it could be easily spread flare up. Children with allergic irritation of their
from one child’s head to another. Each of these respiratory tract are more likely to pick up
items should be labeled and stored separately.2 infectious diseases. To prevent this, it may be
necessary to dehumidify and cool the air.32
A Note about Shoes
Cold Weather
When infants play, they touch the surfaces on Even in cold weather, some form of ventilation is
which they play with their hands, then put necessary. During naptime, put a sleeper gar-
their hands in their mouths. Shoes may be ment over infants’ clothing and a warm blanket
conduits of infectious material when people over older children to keep them comfortable
walk on surfaces that are contaminated with and let in a little fresh air.32 Bundle children up,
disease-causing organisms, then walk into the and let them play outside when weather per-
infant play area. mits.
Before walking on surfaces that infants use In cold weather, indoor air can also become very
specifically for play, adults and children should dry. When this happens, the dry air draws water
remove or cover the shoes they have worn from mucous membranes in the nose and draws
outside of the infant play area. Socks, shoe moisture from the skin. This loss of fluid from
covers, or other shoes/slippers specified only the membranes can interfere with the protective
for the infant play area may be worn.19 functions of the mucous barrier and makes
people more susceptible to illness.32
Ventilation & Fresh Air To prevent the drying of mucous membranes,
“Exchanging indoor air with outdoor air is key don’t overheat rooms. You’ll know humidity is
to reducing the density of contagious germs. too low when you get static shocks from walking
Wherever people gather in groups, they exhale across the floor. In general, try to keep indoor
their germs into their surroundings.”32 This is temperatures between 64–75 degrees F (18–24
especially true for airborne/respiratory transmit- degrees C) in cold weather to reduce the drying
ted germs. effect.32
For this reason, allowing children to play out-
doors as often as possible is important.29 It is also
important to keep rooms children use appropri-
ately heated, cooled, and ventilated to keep
temperatures comfortable and prevent germs
from growing or collecting. Try to ~
• open windows and air out rooms at least
once a day (opening windows maximizes
ventilation),
• keep indoor humidity between 30–50 per-
cent, and
• keep indoor temperature between 64–82
degrees F (18–28 degrees C).32
13

“Mild cases of hepatitis A don’t require treat-
“Potentially” Infectious
ment, and most people who are infected recover
completely with no permanent liver damage.
Unlike hepatitis B and C, hepatitis A doesn’t
develop into chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis – both
Necessity of always taking precautions
potentially fatal conditions.”35
Since symptoms often do not appear until “Practicing good hygiene – including washing
your hands often – is one of the best ways to
some time after a child is infected with an
protect against hepatitis A. Effective vaccines are
illness, it is important to always use pre-
available for people who are most at risk.”35
cautions. We have covered many of the neces-
sary precautions, but let’s take a few moments to
Hepatitis B (HBV)
focus on areas that sometimes evoke fear –
“For you to become infected with HBV, infected
illnesses that are more severe, like HIV and
blood, semen, vaginal secretions, or saliva must
hepatitis.
enter your body. You can’t become infected
through casual contact – hugging, dancing, or
HIV
shaking hands – with someone who has hepatitis
Please know that “to become infected with HIV,
B. You also can’t be infected in any of the follow-
infected blood, semen, or vaginal secretions
must enter your body.”33 This does not happen ing ways:
through regular contact – hugging, kissing, • coming into contact with the sweat or tears
shaking hands, or dancing with a child.33 of someone with HBV;
• sharing a swimming pool, telephone, or toilet
HIV is most commonly transmitted by ~ seat with someone who has the virus; or
• sexual contact; • donating blood.”36
• infected blood and blood transfusion (the
American blood supply has been tested for Hepatitis B, like HIV, is most commonly trans-
HIV since 1985,33 and improved blood- mitted through ~
screening became available in 1992,34 which • sexual transmission;
has substantially reduced infection by blood • needle sharing or accidental needle sticks; and
transfusion); • transmission from mother to child.36
• needle sharing or accidental needle sticks; and
• transmission from mother to child.33 Hepatitis B, however, is nearly 100 times as
infectious as HIV.36
Hepatitis
There are three types of hepatitis viruses that are For some people, the infection of the liver be-
of concern: Hepatitis A, B, and C. comes chronic, leading to liver failure, liver
cancer, or cirrhosis – a condition that causes
Hepatitis A (HAV) permanent scarring of the liver.
Hepatitis A virus “is usually transmitted via the
fecal-oral route. That means that someone with Like HIV, you’re especially at risk if you are an
the virus handles food you eat without washing intravenous (IV) drug user who shares needles
his or her hands after using the toilet. You can or other paraphernalia or have unprotected
also contract the virus by drinking contami- sexual contact with an infected partner. You’re
nated water, eating raw shellfish from water also at higher risk for hepatitis B infection if you
polluted with sewage, or being in close contact were born in or travel to parts of the world
with a person who’s infected – even if that where hepatitis B is widespread.
person has no signs or symptoms. In fact, the
disease is most contagious before signs and Most people infected as adults recover fully from
symptoms ever appear.”35 hepatitis B, even if their signs and symptoms are
severe. Infants and children are much more
“Although not usually as serious as other types likely to develop a chronic infection. Although
of viral hepatitis, hepatitis A causes inflamma- no cure exists for hepatitis B, a vaccine can
tion that affects your liver’s ability to function.”35 prevent the disease.36
14

Hepatitis C (HCV) Potentially Infectious: Taking Precautions
“In general, you contract hepatitis C by coming Because symptoms of all illnesses are not always
in contact with blood contaminated with the immediately visible, we have to treat all blood,
virus. Most people with hepatitis C became body fluids, and secretions as “potentially”
infected through blood transfusions received infectious. Spills of urine, stool, vomit, blood,
before 1992, the year improved blood-screening saliva, human milk, nasal discharge, eye dis-
tests became available. charge, and injury or tissue discharge (e.g., from
a cut or sore) should always be treated as “poten-
You can also contract the virus by injecting tially” infectious. Let’s take a look at how to
drugs with contaminated needles and, less safely handle body fluids:
commonly, from contaminated needles used in
tattooing and body piercing. Needle exchange • Treat all body fluids as if they are contagious.
programs, which increase the availability of • Wash your hands after any contact with
sterile needles, are helping to reduce the risk of body fluids.
hepatitis C, HIV, and other blood-borne diseases. • Wear gloves while cleaning (see Gloving
Procedure). While household rubber gloves
A small percentage of babies born to mothers
are adequate for most spills, disposable
with hepatitis C acquire the infection during
gloves should always be used when blood
childbirth. Mother-to-infant transmission rates
may be present.
are higher among women infected with both • For small spills of urine or stool, wipe off and
hepatitis C and HIV.”34
clean away visible soil with a little detergent
solution; rinse with clean water; follow with
All strains of the hepatitis virus cause the liver to
sanitizer solution applied to the surface and
become inflamed, which interferes with its
left for the appropriate contact time (usually
ability to function. Hepatitis C is generally
2 minutes).
considered to be among the most serious of
• For larger spills, take care to avoid splashing
these viruses. Vaccines exist for hepatitis A and
any contaminated material onto the mucous
B, but no vaccine for hepatitis C has been devel-
membrane of your eyes, nose, or mouth, or
oped.34
into any open sores you may have. Note:
Sores or cuts should always be covered and
In rare cases, hepatitis C may be transmitted
appropriately cared for to avoid antibiotic-
sexually. And in many people infected with
resistant staph infections, which have be-
hepatitis C, no risk factor can be identified.
come more prevalent in schools and day care
settings. (For more information on MRSA
and appropriate care, see the issue of
HealthHints related to this topic at http://
fcs.tamu.edu/health/
Health_Education_Rural_Outreach/
Health_Hints/2006/october06/staph.pdf.)
• Wipe up as much of the visible material as
possible with disposable paper towels, and
carefully place the soiled paper towels and
other soiled disposable material (e.g., tissue,
bandages, diapers, etc.) in a leak-proof,
plastic bag that can be securely tied or sealed.
• Immediately use a detergent or a disinfec-
tant-detergent to clean the spill area; then
rinse the area with clean water.
• For blood and body fluid spills on carpet,
blot to remove body fluids from the fabric as
quickly as possible; then spot clean the area
with detergent-disinfectant (rather than
bleach solution); sanitize by continuing to
apply and extract the detergent-disinfectant
15

until there is no visible soil. Follow the
Child Care Providers
manufacturer’s instructions for the use of the
sanitizer to be sure the carpet is sanitized by
the treatment. Dry the surface. Shampoo or
steam-clean the contaminated surface as
Taking care of yourself
soon as possible.
• Indisposable mops and other equipment “During the first six to twelve months of
used to clean up body fluids should be employment, most care providers get
cleaned and sanitized, rinsed with fresh sick more than usual because they are
sanitizing solution, wrung as dry as possible, exposed to a wide variety of germs. Caring for
and air-dried. others can also cause stress, which lowers resis-
• Remove and bag clothing (yours and those tance to illness.”2
worn by children) soiled by body fluids. Put
on fresh clothes only after washing the soiled Care providers who are ill should take care of
skin and hands of everyone involved. themselves, not the children. Allow your own
• Reuseable household rubber gloves used for body the opportunity to get well. If you are ill,
stay home and recuperate. You cannot provide
general cleaning should be treated as a
the best quality of care if you are sick, and you
contaminated surface, which means sanitiz-
may spread the illness to others if you come to
ing solution should be applied to them.
work. Get well and stay well by choosing healthy
Remove, dry, and store these gloves away
behaviors:
from food and food surfaces. Discard dispos-
able gloves in a sealed, plastic bag. • Wash your hands.
• Always wash your hands, even if you • Maintain current immunizations, especially
have been wearing tetanus.
gloves.19, 37 • Take scheduled breaks and vacations.
• Observe good nutrition.
• Exercise regularly.
• Don’t smoke.
• Rest sufficiently each day.
• Engage in hobbies/activities that do not
involve caring for someone else.2
Resources for Your Child Care Center
Need resources for your child care center? Check out some of these...
Infectious Diseases in Child Care Facilities – Fact sheet with statistics on illnesses in child care (great
for presentations) at http://www.nfid.org/_old1/content/factsheets/childcare.html
Gloving – Description and pictures of how to put on and remove disposable gloves at
http://nrc.uchsc.edu/CFOC/PDFVersion/Appendix%20D.pdf
Healthy Handwashing – Poster at http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/
HealthyHandwashingPoster.jpg
Clean & Sanitize – Poster at http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/CleanandSanitizePoster.jpg
Diapering – Poster at http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/DiaperingPoster.jpg
Blood & Body Fluid Safety – Poster at http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/
BloodandBodyFluidsPoster.jpg
Sample Cleaning/Sanitizing Schedule at http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/cleaning_pf.htm
Sample Food Service Cleaning Schedule at http://nrc.uchsc.edu/CFOC/PDFVersion/Appendix%20S.pdf
16

References
1. Mayo Clinic (2006). Children’s illness: Top 5 causes of missed school. Retrieved December 15,
2006. From http://mayoclinic.com/health/childrens-conditions/CC00059.
2. ARCH National Resource Center for Respite and Crisis Care Services (1996). Preventing the spread
of disease: Tips for providers. Retrieved November 10, 2006. From http://www.archrespite.org/
archfs42.htm.
3. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (2006). Common cold. Retrieved November
27, 2006. From http://www3.niaid.nih.gov/healthscience/healthtopics/colds/cause.htm.
4. Cleveland Clinic Health Information Center (2006). Gastroenteritis. Retrieved November 27, 2006.
From http://www.clevelandclinic.org/health/health-info/docs/3900/3901.asp.
5. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Chicken pox. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001592.htm.
6. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Ringworm. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001439.htm.
7. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Head lice. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000840.htm.
8. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Impetigo. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000860.htm.
9. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Meningitis. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000680.htm.
10. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). Hepatitis. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/001154.htm.
11. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). HIV infection. Re-
trieved November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000602.htm.
12. U.S. National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (2006). AIDS. Retrieved
November 22, 2006. From http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/000594.htm.
13. BC Health Planning (2003). Preventing illness in the child care setting. Retrieved November 27,
2006. From http://www.healthservices.gov.bc.ca/ccf/child/publicat/comm/com018.pdf.
14. Texas Department of Family and Protective Services (2006). Minimum standard rules for licensed
child-care centers: When communicable disease is diagnosed or suspected. Retrieved November 10,
2006. From http://www.dfps.state.tx.us/handbooks/ms_homes_standards/apx_v_b.htm.
15. National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care (2006). Handwashing. Retrieved
November 20, 2006. From http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/handwashing_pf.htm.
16. Texas Department of State Health Services (2006). Information on staphylococcal infections for
day care administrators and care givers. Retrieved October 5, 2006. From http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/
idcu/health/antibiotic_resistance/mrsa/mrsa_daycareadmin.pdf.
17

References...
17. Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department (2006). What should I use to wash my hands? Re-
trieved October 6, 2005. From http://www.tpchd.org/files/library/12b59c64cf77a8a0.pdf.
18. GroupHealth Cooperative, Tacoma-Pierce County Health Department, & Washington State
Department of Health (2006). Living with MRSA. Retrieved October 6, 2006. From http://
www.tpchd.org/files/library/3550750db4a81b14.pdf.
19. American Academy of Pediatrics, American Public Health Association, and National Resource
Center for Health and Safety in Child Care (2002). Caring for Our Children: National Health and
Safety Performance Standards: Guidelines for Out-of-Home Child Care Programs, 2nd edition. Elk
Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics and Washington, DC: American Public Health
Association. Retrieved November 27, 2006. From http://nrc.uchsc.edu/CFOC/index.html.
20. National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care (2006). Cleaning and sanitizing.
Retrieved November 20, 2006. From http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/cleaning_pf.htm.
21. Texas Department of State Health Services (2005). Communicable diseases notes for schools and
child care centers. Retrieved November 20, 2006. From http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/idcu/health/
schools_childcare/resources/.
22. National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care (2006). Diapering. Retrieved No-
vember 20, 2006. From http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/diapering_pf.htm.
23. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Diapering. Retrieved November 20, 2006. From
http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/Download/DiaperingPoster.jpg.
24. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Gloves. Retrieved December 4, 2006. From
http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/default.aspx?page=poi&language=content&content_id=6.
25. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Ground meat and food poisoning. Retrieved December 4,
2006. From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/
default.aspx?page=poi&content_id=8&language=content.
26. National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care (2006). Food Preparation. Retrieved
November 20, 2006. From http://www.healthykids.us/chapters/food_pf.htm.
27. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Care of equipment and utensils. Retrieved December 4, 2006.
From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/default.aspx?page=fp&content_id=66&language=content.
28. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Washing dishes and mouthed toys. Retrieved December 4,
2006. From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/
default.aspx?page=fp&content_id=73&language=content.
29. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Stopping the spread of respiratory diseases. Retrieved Decem-
ber 4, 2006. From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/
default.aspx?page=poi&language=content&content_id=14.
30. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Handling clean dishes and utensils. Retrieved December 4,
2006. From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/
default.aspx?page=poi&language=content&content_id=68.
18

References...
31. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Food preparation hygiene. Retrieved December 4, 2006. From
http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/default.aspx?page=fp&content_id=194&language=content.
32. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Fresh air, temperature, and humidity. Retrieved December 4,
2006. From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/
default.aspx?page=poi&language=content&content_id=16.
33. Mayo Clinic (2006). HIV/AIDS. Retrieved December 15, 2006. From http://mayoclinic.com/health/
hiv-aids/DS00005.
34. Mayo Clinic (2006). Hepatitis C. Retrieved December 15, 2006. From http://mayoclinic.com/health/
hepatitis-c/DS00097.
35. Mayo Clinic (2006). Hepatitis A. Retrieved December 15, 2006. From http://mayoclinic.com/health/
hepatitis-a/DS00397.
36. Mayo Clinic (2006). Hepatitis B. Retrieved December 15, 2006. From http://mayoclinic.com/health/
hepatitis-b/DS00398.
37. Global Healthy Child Care (2005). Blood and body fluids safety. Retrieved December 4, 2006.
From http://www.globalhealthychildcare.org/default.aspx?page=poi&content_id=2&language=content.
Attn: Janet M. Pollard
2251 TAMU
College Station, Texas 77843-2251
Extension programs serve people of all ages regardless of socioeconomic level, race, color, sex, religion, disability, or national origin.
The Texas A&M University System, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the County Commissioners Courts of Texas Cooperating
A member of The Texas A&M University System and its statewide Agriculture Program
19