Guide to Childhood Illness — Recommendations for Parents and Child Care Facilities
(Source: NCedar_GuideToIllness_021515.pdf)

ILLNESS: 5th DISEASE (Erythemia infectiosum)
Signs and symptoms: Fever, headache and very red cheeks. Lace-like rash on chest, stomach, arms and legs that lasts 3 days to 3 weeks. You may see the rash off and on. Usual for ages 5-14 and is unusual in adults. Itchy, blistery rash with mild fever. Blisters usually
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor and ask about using over the counter pain/fever medicine. Give child plenty of fluids. Prevent scratching by trimming fingernails and putting gloves on the child during the night. Pregnant women exposed to this disease should consult with their doctor.
When can child return to child care: Keep child home if fever is present.

ILLNESS: CHICKEN POX (Varicella)
Signs and symptoms: occur in clumps and are more commonly seen on the stomach, chest and back. After several days, blisters scab over. Some children have only a few blisters, others can have several hundred.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Calamine lotion or cool baking soda in water bath can help to reduce itching. Prevent scratching by trimming fingernails and putting gloves on the child during the night.
When can child return to child care: Child should stay home, until all the blisters are crusted with no oozing scabs

ILLNESS: COLD SORES & MOUTH SORES
Signs and symptoms: Fever, painful, small, fluid-filled or red blisters on mouth, gums or lips. The sores are usually reddish or purple and can appear one-at-a-time or in little bunches. Children with hand, foot and mouth disease may also have a small red rash on hands and feet.
What to do: The sores should be kept as dry and covered as possible. Do not allow children to share toys. Make sure the child gets plenty of rest. Ask child’s
When can child return to child care: If the child is drooling and has sores, consult child’s doctor before returning to child care. Otherwise, child does not need to miss child care.

ILLNESS: EAR, NOSE AND CHEST INFECTIONS
Signs and symptoms: May include mild symptoms such as cough, runny nose, watery eyes, sore throat, chills and tiredness associated with the common cold, croup, pneumonia, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), bronchitis and ear infections.
What to do: doctor about using over the counter pain or fever medicine. The child and those caring for him should wash their hands often. Seek medical treatment immediately if child has the following signs of difficulty breathing: -Blue or gray skin around the nose, mouth or fingernails -Struggles to breath -Makes noisy, high-pitched sounds when breathing
When can child return to child care: Child who is listless or with fever should stay home. Child without fever does not need to miss child care as long as child can participate easily in activities.

ILLNESS: DIARRHEA
Signs and symptoms: The child’s bowel movements are more frequent, loose and watery than usual. Stool may contain blood. An increase in body temperature above normal. It
What to do: Make sure the child gets plenty of rest and give a diet of clear liquids. Breastfeeding can continue. If symptoms continue, fever occurs, or if blood appears in stool, call your doctor. The child and care givers should wash hands frequently.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care when diarrhea is gone and the child feels better. *There are special exclusion rules for E. coli O157:H7 and Shigella

ILLNESS: FEVER
Signs and symptoms: does not always indicate serious illness. A fever may be present if the child’s temperature is 101 degrees measured by the mouth. The most common causes of fever in children are sickness, teething and recent vaccination.
What to do: Call child’s doctor if your child is uncomfortable or has a change in behavior. If a child under 8 weeks of age has an armpit temperature of 100 degrees, call your doctor.
When can child return to child care: Child does not need to stay home unless child has a fever AND behavior changes, signs or symptoms of illness.

ILLNESS: FLU (Influenza)
Signs and symptoms: Fever, chills, sore throat, cough, headache, muscle aches, extreme sleepiness. Some children may develop pneumonia with influenza. Children with influenza may have nausea, vomiting or diarrhea but never without respiratory symptoms.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Make sure child gets plenty of rest. Ask doctor about over-the-counter fever/pain relievers and antiviral medicine. All children older than six months are recommended to get an influenza vaccination every year.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care after the child feels well.

ILLNESS: HEPATITIS A
Signs and symptoms: Stomach pain, sick feeling, fever and diarrhea. Skin and white part of eyes might turn yellow.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor IMMEDIATELY. Consult with child’s doctor. Your doctor may give you
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care one week after the start of symptoms.

ILLNESS: IMPETIGO
Signs and symptoms: Skin sore with a yellow, honey colored scab. It may ooze and drain. Most sores are on the face, around the nose and mouth.
What to do: medicine and will tell you how to take care of the sores. The child and care givers should wash hands frequently.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care 24 hours after the child started medicine from the doctor. There is no need for child to be sent

ILLNESS: LICE (Pediculosis)
Signs and symptoms: Lice (bugs) and eggs (nits) in hair near scalp, especially on top of head, behind ears, and back of neck causing scalp to itch.
What to do: Use regular shampoo and cream rinse daily for 14 days. Comb hair everyday with a fine toothed comb while cream rinse is still in the hair.
When can child return to child care: home from child care the day of diagnosis and should be allowed to return after first treatment. Call 800-369-2229 and request “Getting Rid of Head Lice” brochure.

ILLNESS: MENINGITIS (Viral or Bacterial)
Signs and symptoms: Fever, headache and stiff neck are common symptoms in anyone over 2 years old. Newborns and small infants may appear over-sleepy or inactive, be irritable, vomit or feed poorly.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor IMMEDIATELY. Viral meningitis is only spread when someone has contact with an infected person’s stool. Bacterial meningitis can be spread through the air, so close contacts may be given medicine to prevent illness.
When can child return to child care: Children with bacterial meningitis may return to child care 24 hours after starting antibiotics. Children with viral meningitis may return when feeling better.

ILLNESS: MRSA – community acquired (Methicillin resistant Staph aureus)
Signs and symptoms: A boil or pimple that can be swollen red and painful and have drainage. Often mistaken for a spider bite. Rare in children with 2 doses of the measles, mumps
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Treat and cover all open wounds. Reinforce hand washing and environmental cleaning.
When can child return to child care: Child or staff does not need to stay home if the wound is covered. Child can go back to child care 5

ILLNESS: MUMPS
Signs and symptoms: and rubella vaccine. Fever, swollen and sore glands at the jaw. Sometimes children also have a cough and runny nose.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor and ask about using over the counter pain/fever medicine. Give plenty of liquids.
When can child return to child care: days after start of symptoms or until symptoms are gone, whichever is longer.

ILLNESS: PINK EYE (Purulent Conjunctivitis)
Signs and symptoms: Eyes are red/pink with creamy or yellow discharge and the eyelids may be matted after sleep. Eyelids and around the eyes may be red, swollen and painful. Usually red, splotchy areas on the skin, sometimes
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Child without fever should continue to be watched for other symptoms by parents or child care providers.
When can child return to child care: Child may return to child care when all symptoms are gone. If the child has no fever or

ILLNESS: RASH ILLNESS
Signs and symptoms: with bumps that may or may not be whitish in color. Child may have a fever or behavioral change.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor if child develops a fever and acts differently with the rash. Consult with child’s doctor. Ringworm is spread by
When can child return to child care: behavioral change with rash, then the child may return to child care. Child does not need to miss child

ILLNESS: RINGWORM
Signs and symptoms: Ring shaped, scaly spot on skin or head. May leave a lighter spot on skin or a flaky patch of baldness on head. May have a raised donut-shaped appearance.
What to do: direct skin to skin contact. Cover the area to prevent spread. Do not let your child share personal items (combs, brushes, clothing, towels, bedding). Dry skin thoroughly after washing and wash bathroom surfaces and toys daily.
When can child return to child care: care. Child should not go to the gym, swimming pools or play contact sports. It is important to know that treatment may take at least 4 weeks.

ILLNESS: SCABIES
Signs and symptoms: Severe itching that can be worse at night. You may see small red bumps on the skin or burrows between fingers, on wrists or elbows, in armpits, or on waistline.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care 24 hours after first treatment.

ILLNESS: STREP THROAT
Signs and symptoms: Sore throats can be due to many causes. Strep throat is a severe form of a sore throat. Common symptoms include: sore throat, hard to swallow, fever, enlarged glands and extreme fatigue.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Give all medicine for the entire time directed. Antibiotics are not recommended for treatment without a positive laboratory test.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care 24 hours after antibiotics are started.

ILLNESS: VOMITING
Signs and symptoms: Common causes of vomiting are sickness and upset stomach.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor if fever is present. Call doctor immediately if child is unable to keep fluids down for more than 24 hours.
When can child return to child care: Child can return to child care once symptoms are gone.

ILLNESS: WHOOPING COUGH (Pertussis)
Signs and symptoms: Persistent, deep-sounding cough. Some children may have a “whoop” sound in cough. Some may vomit or lose their breath during and after coughing.
What to do: Consult with child’s doctor. Give all prescribed medicine for the entire time directed. Doctor may prescribe medicine to close contacts to prevent illness.
When can child return to child care: Child can go back to child care after 5 days of antibiotics or 21 days of cough if no antibiotics are given.

Additional info: Immunization is available Do you need a doctor? Do you need health coverage program. Hawk-i provides immunizations, and much
Immunization is available. Do you need a doctor? Call the Healthy Families Line at 1-800-369-2229.
Do you need health coverage for your child? Low cost or free health care coverage may be available for your child through the hawk-i program. Hawk-i provides child physical exams for well or ill children and medicine from the doctor, dental and vision services, immunizations, and much more. Call 1-800-257-8563 or visit: www.hawk-i.org.
Healthy Child Care Iowa, Iowa Department of Public Health, September 2006